---
layout: post
title:  "CAB - 8 year after reading the Pheonix project"
date:   2021-09-19 00:00:00 -0000
categories: process
---

After reading [The Phoenix Project](https://itrevolution.com/the-phoenix-project/) when it first came
out, I was completely in shock because my employer at that time didn't have a CAB (Change Advisory Board)
at all. The company and department I was working in at that time was responsible from infrastructure
to front end. Now 8 years and a few jobs later, while explaining the CAB process to a new starter,
I suddenly realize we are doing exactly what is described in the phoenix project.

Currently, we have to go through the CAB in order to deploy something to production.  Namely,
1. The team responsible for the change submits their change with full risk assessment and back out plan.
2. Change is reviewed weekly by all system owners, and you can own something as little as a pod in Kubernetes.
3. All the other teams potentially impacted needs to approve.
4. Make the change at some scheduled time slot.

When I **was** the new starter, such bloated process seems completely insane and a waste of time. I was
constantly comparing to what I would do in my previous company.  For example, all the changes can be
found on one side of the room filled with post&ndash;it notes. All the engineers, approximately one hundred,
can be found on the same side of the building on the same floor. So if I ever need to make a hotfix to
production, I can just stand up and shout loudly. Coordination was never an issue because everyone can
see all the deployment pipelines.

Now, working in a multinational corporation where my own department spans -8/+8 timezone difference,
it implicitly creates a need of synchronization. 
