---
layout: post
title:  "CAB - 8 year after reading the Phoenix project"
date:   2021-12-11 00:00:00 -0000
categories: process
---

After reading [The Phoenix Project](https://itrevolution.com/the-phoenix-project/) when it first came
out, I was completely in shock because my employer at that time didn't have a CAB (Change Advisory Board)
at all. The company and department I was working in at that time was responsible from infrastructure
to front end. Now 8 years and a few jobs later, while explaining the CAB process to a new starter,
I suddenly realize that we (my employer at the time of writing) are doing exactly what is described in the
phoenix project pre&ndash;DevOps movement.

Currently, we have to go through the CAB in order to deploy something to production.  Namely, 
  * The team responsible for the change submits their change with full risk assessment and back out plan.
  * Change is reviewed weekly by all system owners, and you can own something as little as a single machine
    learning model that serves one api.
  * All the other teams potentially impacted needs to approve.
  * Make the change at some scheduled time slot.

When I *was* the new starter, such bloated process seems completely insane and a waste of time. I was
constantly comparing to what I would do in my previous company.  For example, all the changes can be
found on one side of the room filled with post&ndash;it notes. All the engineers, approximately one hundred,
can be found on the same side of the building on the same floor. So if I ever need to make a release to
production, I can just stand up and shout loudly. Coordination was never an issue because everyone can
see all the deployment pipelines.

Now, working in a multinational corporation where 1.) my own department is a few hundred strong spanning
over -8/+8 with respect to UTC timezone,
2.) and each department has their own data restriction while using shared infrastructure,
the need of synchronization takes place naturally over CAB. At the same time, there is no doubt that some
random people in a different part of the organization can block you from a release has no place in modern
software development cycle. As said in 
[DevOps handbook](https://itrevolution.com/the-devops-handbook/), the bigger danger of putting barriers
on making a change is that people don't get enough practice of it. Not practicing deployment (to production)
makes people less confident and has a high correlation with increased failure rate.

Readers of my previous post such as
[kubernetes migration]({% post_url 2021-08-29-using-envoy-to-bridge-a-kubernetes-migration %}) will know that
we (as a department) are in the middle of a large scale migration.  One key element is the increased
separation of environments; clear data and network segmentation enable atomic service upgrades.
Therefore, we are in the fortunate position of back to the drawing board for how a CAB should run.
The aim is to move away from the status quo and be stuck in never ending bureaucracy.
Our original set of ground rules are:
  * Normal change happens Monday to Friday without formal meetings.
  * Weekend changes are discussed in an open meeting (everyone is invited). 
  * You can schedule daily changes, i.e. nightly retrain and redeploy a machine learning model is simply
    a note on the change board. 
  * You inform those **who you think may be impacted**.  This requires a certain level of
    maturity and also experience.  A failure may change your known "blast radius", so you constantly
    adjust according to the latest knowledge.
  * All changes are automatically approved.
  * People cannot veto a change unless there is conflict.

The last two points are probably the most unconventional item when we think of a CAB; allowing all
changes to happen is an attempt to lower friction and improve deployment frequency.
We had the most debate about the last point as a lot of people worry about teams pushing through a change
despite repeated failure &mdash; a completely valid concern.  A counterargument is that we have to accept
failure and to develop the ability to rollback quickly and smoothly. For now, the notion that rollback
is as important as a deployment still stands (and teams do invest time practising a rollback). I am super
interested to see how we value rollback vs deployment in the future.

In short, the role of the CAB differs to the traditional one in that they monitor (deployment) failure rate
and impact. People on CAB will sit in post&ndash;mortems as well as checking the various CI/CD pipelines.
When *some threshold*[^1] is breached, the CAB ensures that struggling teams are given the help they need.

[^1]: Purely based on gut instinct rather than concrete threshold even though we have the metrics.
